now the us retailer gamestops christmas
commercial
had an awful lot of screaming in it i
think they're really gonna
love these me too
and now it's the cause of screaming on
wall street the struggling company
shares suddenly rocketed
not because it's doing well despite the
advert it really isn't
but because members of a reddit message
board apparently decided to teach
investment banking a lesson now they're
screaming on all sides as some say laws
are being broken
others say no one's done anything wrong
regulators may be called in
and suddenly everyone's a stock market
expert well we've got a real one
gary stevenson made so much money
trading in london he retired at 27
now he's an economist who specializes in
examining inequality
and he thinks that's what's been exposed
here he's with me now gary
you've probably answered this question a
lot over the last few days but can you
explain as simply as possible
what happened with gabe stop yeah that's
no problem at all david that's the
question that everybody wants to know
right now okay
so let's keep it nice and simple what is
short selling short selling is a way
that you can make money from the price
of a stock going
down now if you think the price of a
stock is going to go up it's easy you go
out you buy the stock it goes up you
sell it
but if it's going to go down what do you
do because you can't sell it if you
don't
have it the way it works is you find
someone who does have it
you borrow it say for a week for example
the way you might borrow a library book
and then you sell it and then you hope
to buy it back within the week
you buy it for a lower price and you
sold it and you make your profit that's
how it works short selling is you borrow
it
you sell it you buy it back later
hopefully for cheaper and that's what's
been happening with gamestop which is a
company that a lot of investors don't
think will perhaps even survive for much
longer so they started to
short sell it and then this group on
reddit decided
hold on that's immoral started buying
loads of shares and suddenly instead of
going down
the stock price went right up yeah i
think it's important to get a bit
broader context here
in the us just like here loads of people
they can't work they've lost their jobs
because of code they're seeing a home
and they are sitting at home making no
money getting relatively small stimulus
checks
and they're watching the stock market go
through the roof so it's
this mad situation where ordinary people
are sitting at home
they can't even work a job you know
they're struggling to look after their
families and the billionaires and
multimillionaires are making
billions and mighty millions on the
stock markets and they want to get
involved
so they're out there on the internet and
they've converged on this one website
reddit which is a popular messaging
board all over the world especially in
the us
there's clearly some very well informed
people here and they said look these
hedge funds i put
massive short positions on gamestop if
we all get together as a group
and we buy enough gamestop stock then
this is what is known
as a classic short squeeze i know you've
got a short position
so i run the price up and when it when
the time comes you need to buy it back
well you have to pay me whatever i ask
for it and this has happened before you
can
if you look in the 80s there was a big
short squeeze in gold massively it does
happen from time to time
although it's not normally managed by
messaging boards on the internet what
about the role of these relatively
new apps things like robin hood which
had to
take action to stop people buying and
selling
uh stock in gamestop what kind of role
have these
had in i think the idea was to
democratize
wall street and investment banking have
they had a good influence
you know what david i'm really happy you
asked me that because on the one side we
have this situation and it's not just
this last year it's been happening for
10 years you know
stock markets have gone up about three
or four times five times depending what
country you look at it since 2008
and in that time have a wage has gone up
five times definitely not
so we've had this situation where the
rich are doing really well on stock
markets and also
property markets for example whereas
ordinary people are not making money
so giving ordinary people access to
stock markets
it has to be seen as a good thing but at
the same time there is a really
dangerous side to this now in the last
one year
the number of people using online spread
betting websites in this country has
exploded
and that's for a variety of reasons
right people can't work you know there's
no football people don't bet on
something
but also people are struggling
financially and they see how well
super rich people are doing on the stock
market and they want to be involved my
concern is
when they use these online spread
betting websites they don't really know
what they're doing
they're not getting good advice they're
getting dragged into it that i know
people they're trading all the time
and essentially i think there are people
who are potentially developing a
gambling addiction and it can be really
dangerous and look
gambling addiction is a serious thing
can ruin families can ruin lives and you
know people can lose their housing
deposits their kids university funds
so we're just like to really caution
people out there looking at things like
bitcoin as well for example or game stop
thinking
oh my god i'm missing out i need to get
involved on this please please be
cautious these
they're calling them meme stocks on the
internet if you're hearing about it in
the news
it's probably too late to make money
from it you know i wish it was as easy
as that
but please people out there listening to
this be careful don't rush in there
don't
gamble more than you can afford to lose
and these investments that are in the
news right now
bitcoin cryptocurrencies definitely
gamestop are very risky investments and
i would
to be honest advise ordinary people to
stay out or at least invest very very
very sensibly is there going to be a
fallout from this gary is there going to
be change will regulators have to get
involved
well i mean they're i would love to have
been
a fly on the wall in the robin hood
offices when they decided to ban trading
i'm sure he would ask robin hood
they would say they are protecting their
customers from extreme volatility
and you know like i've just said this is
potentially dangerous for customers so
they've got their right to say that i
don't know what's true or what's fast
but there is definitely
possibility there's going to be
regulation you know i go on this reddit
message board
they insist they're going to do a
class-action lawsuit against robin hood
i've got neither where that's going to
happen um what i do think is important
is to realize that this is not a one-off
it's going to keep happening and that is
because of the way that governments have
dealt with the coronavirus crisis
now the money they used for the furlough
scheme for example they didn't raise
taxes and they didn't borrow that money
they simply printed it
at the bank of england and that means
there's been a flood of extra cash into
the system
that cash is swirling around and it's
largely sitting with richer people
and it's a huge amount it's ten thousand
pounds per adult in this country that's
been printed and it's the same in the
u.s or a similar amount
that money swimming around is sitting
with richard people they're going to use
it to push up stock markets
to push up property prices and ordinary
people are going to want to get involved
in that so i think people need to be
aware that that's what's happening
that's what the government's doing and
it is going to affect ordinary people
and that's the leader we're back at 4pm
on monday see you then